Project ID: chbn28
Project Name: Hadron Scattering and Resonance Properties from Lattice QCD

Principal investigator: Carsten Urbach, Helmholtz-Institut für
Strahlen- und Kernphysik (Theorie) and Bethe Center for Theoretical
Physics, Universität Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany


Team:
C. Alexandrou, Department of Physics, University of Cyprus, P.O. Box, 20537, 1678
Nicosia, Cyprus and Computation-based Science and Technology Research Center, The
Cyprus Institute, 20 Kavafi Str., Nicosia 2121, Cyprus

R. Frezzotti, Dip. di Fisica, Università di Roma Tor Vergata and INFN, Sez. di Roma
Tor Vergata, Via della Ricerca Scientifica, I-00133 Roma, Italy

C. Helmes, Helmholtz-Institut für Strahlen- und Kernphysik (Theorie) and
Bethe Center for Theoretical Physics, Universität Bonn, 53115 Bonn,
Germany

K. Jansen, NIC, DESY, Platanenallee 6, 15738 Zeuthen, Germany

B. Kostrzewa, Helmholtz-Institut für Strahlen- und Kernphysik (Theorie) and
Bethe Center for Theoretical Physics, Universität Bonn, 53115 Bonn,
Germany

M. Petschlies, Helmholtz-Institut für Strahlen- und Kernphysik (Theorie) and
Bethe Center for Theoretical Physics, Universität Bonn, 53115 Bonn,
Germany

F. Pittler, Helmholtz-Institut für Strahlen- und Kernphysik (Theorie) and
Bethe Center for Theoretical Physics, Universität Bonn, 53115 Bonn,
Germany

M. Ueding, Helmholtz-Institut für Strahlen- und Kernphysik (Theorie) and
Bethe Center for Theoretical Physics, Universität Bonn, 53115 Bonn,
Germany

U. Wenger, Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Bern, Sidlerstrasse 5, CH-
3012 Bern, Switzerland

M. Werner, Helmholtz-Institut für Strahlen- und Kernphysik (Theorie) and
Bethe Center for Theoretical Physics, Universität Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany

Abstact:
It has been a long-standing dream in nuclear physics to study nuclei like,
for instance, carbon directly from Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), the
underlying fundamental theory of strong interactions. Such an endeavor
is very challenging both, methodically and numerically. Towards this
goal physicists from the European Twisted Mass Collaboration and in
particular the University of Bonn have investigated two- and
three-hadron systems using the approach of Lattice QCD.

Report:
It is a long lasting dream in nuclear physics to study nuclei like,
for instance, carbon directly from Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), the
underlying fundamental theory of strong interactions. Such a
theoretical investigation from first principles is difficult for
several reasons: first, QCD describes a strong interaction for
which approximate methods based on perturbation theory break down.
By contrast, in lattice QCD the problem can be treated from
first principles non-perturbatively.
To do so, space-time is discretised in a regular lattice and
the interactions of the underlying degrees of freedom, quarks
and gluons, are determined by numerical simulations of the 
so-called path integral. 
Second, while nuclei can be described reasonably well as bound states of
protons and neutrons, these themselves consist of three quarks each.
The computational complexity in lattice QCD is proportional to the
factorial of the number of involved quarks. Thus, a nucleus with more
than five protons and neutrons, i.e. more than 15 quarks represents a
major challenge. This challenge requires the usage of most modern
supercomputer resources available for instance at the Jülich
Supercomputing Centre (JSC). Third, bound states like nuclei can be
studied in lattice QCD only indirectly. This indirect approach is named Lüscher
method and can be understood as follows: imagine two, for simplicity
fully equal particles in a box with finite edge length L. If this length
L is much larger than the typical interaction range of the two
particles one expects little interaction between them. 
Any measurement of the two particle system will, hence,
yield twice what one measures for a single particle. As soon as L
becomes close to the interaction range, i.e. the particles feel each
other, one expects small modifications compared to the non-interacting
case. It turns out that these deviations are directly related to the 
interaction properties of the two particles. For three particles the
principle is similar, but the investigation of the corresponding two
particle system is required as a prerequisite. Here the additional
challenge is to disentangle those small modifications from the
background. 

Scientists of the Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn
together with collaborators from the Extended Twisted Mass
Collaboration (ETMC) have been able to investigate various two-meson,
meson-baryon and three-meson systems. In particular, pion-pion,
pion-kaon and kaon-kaon systems could be studied with focus also a
careful evaluation of the relevant uncertainties, leading also to a
number of important publications. As one of the highlights, the
resources available at Jülich Supercomputer Centre made it
possible to study two- and three-pion systems at physical pion mass
value (dubbed the physical point).

Since this was a longer running compute project, the JSC supercomputing
resources used for reaching this result are JUQUEEN, JURECA and
JUWELS, including also JUWELS Booster. The scientists had to develop
highly optimised software to make optimal use of these precious
resources. On the one hand, this involved adapting and making use of the
GPU-accelerated QUDA lattice QCD library and its highly efficient
solvers [3] leading to reductions in computing time requirements by orders
of magnitude at the physical point. On the other hand, the factorial growth 
of complexity described above was tackled through the factorisation and 
task-based parallelisation of the resulting expressions as well as the usage 
symmetries and the caching of common subexpressions wherever possible.
The generated data can be used for other projects, too, and is still being anlysed.

In the figure results for the isospin-2 pion scattering
length a<sub>0</sub> multiplied with the mass of the pion
M<sub>&pi;</sub> as a function of the mass of the pion divided by its
decay constant f<sub>&pi;</sub> obtained in 2015 with the latest
results obtained in 2021 are compared. The latest results [1] (orange
triangles) make the long extrapolation to the physical point using
chiral perturbation theory (ChPT, dashed line) superfluous, which was
still mandatory in 2015 [2]. The 2021 result is also fully compatible
with experimental results.

This result represents on the one hand a significant technical
advancement as it proves the feasibility of the investigation of three
hadron systems at the physical point, therefore allowing for a direct
comparison with experimental results. On the other hand the result
further fosters our confidence in QCD as a powerful theory to describe
the strong interactions in nature.

figure caption: The isospin-2 pion scattering length
a<sub>0</sub> multiplied with the mass of the pion M<sub>&pi;</sub> as
a function of the mass of the pion divided by its decay constant
f<sub>&pi;</sub> is shown, comparing results from [1] and [2], both
obtained within this compute project. The dashed line respresent the 
extrapolation of the results from [2] using chiral perturbation theory.

[1] M. Fischer et al. (ETMC), Eur.Phys.J.C 81 (2021) 5, 436
[2] C. Helmes et al. (ETMC), JHEP 09 (2015) 109
[3] Clark, M.A., et al., SC'16
