It is a long lasting dream in nuclear physics to study nuclei like,
for instance, carbon directly from Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), the
underlying fundamental theory of strong interactions. Such an endeavor
is very challenging both, methodically and numerically. Towards this
goal physicists from the European Twisted Mass Collaboration and in
particular the University of Bonn have started to investigate two
hadron systems using the approach of Lattice QCD. 

It is a long lasting dream in nuclear physics to study nuclei like,
for instance, carbon directly from Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), the
underlying fundamental theory of strong interactions. Such a
theoretical investigation from first principles is difficult for
several reasons: first, QCD describes a strong interaction which
cannot be solved approximately. Therefore, lattice QCD as a
non-perturbative method is required, for which the space-time is
discretised with finite lattice spacing. Second, the degrees of
freedom in QCD are so-called quarks and gluons, while nuclei can be
described reasonably well as bound states of protons and
neutrons. Protons and neutrons consist of three quarks each. The
computational complexity in lattice QCD is proportional to the
factorial of the number of involved quarks. Thus, a nucleus with more
than five protons and neutrons, i.e. more than 15 quarks represents a
major challenge. This challenge requires the usage of most modern
supercomputer resources available for instance at the J체lich
Supercomputing Centre (JSC) or the High Performance Computing Center
Stuttgart (HLRS). Third, bound states like nuclei can be studied in
lattice QCD only indirectly. This indirect approach is named L체scher
method and can be understood as follows: imaging two, for simplicity
fully equal particles in a box with finite edge length L. If the edge
length L is much larger than the typical interaction range of the two
particles one expects little interaction between the two
particles. Any measurement of the two particle system will, hence,
yield twice what one measures for a single particle. As soon as L
becomes close to the interaction range one expects, however,
modifications. And these modifications are directly related to the
interaction properties of the two particles. 

In order to tackle this challenge, scientists of the Rheinische
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universit채t Bonn together with scientists from
Peking University are investigating various two meson  
and meson-baryon systems. With the resources provided to us by the
computer centres in J체lich and Stuttgart we were able to study two
pion systems with various isospins, pion-kaon, kaon-kaon and the
pion-nucleon meson baryon system. 

The animation shows how the phase shift &delta;<sub>1</sub> of the
&rho;-meson, calculated with the supercomputer resources available to us,
changes with the pion mass: from almost a stable particle at pion mass
of 450 MeV down to the physical pion mass value of 135 MeV, where one
can compare directly to the experimental result [2] shown as red circles.


figure caption: We show the &rho;-meson phase shift
&delta;<sub>1</sub> as a function of the center of mass energy. The
red circles represent the experimental 
results [2], the solid line our lattice calculation [1]. The animation
visualises the approach of the physical point where the pion mass
assumes a value of 135 MeV. 


[1] M. Werner et al., accepted for publication in EPJA, <a href="http://arxiv.org/abs/arXiv:1907.01237">arXiv:1907.01237</a>
[2] S. D. Protopopescu et al. , Phys. Rev. D7 , 1279 (1973)
